.TH NOVA_TIME_DECODER 3 "July 2026" "nova_time_decoder 1.0.0" "Python Library"
.SH NAME
nova_time_decoder \- Python library to encode and decode NOvA DAQ timestamps
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B from nova_time_decoder import (
.B "    unix_to_nova, nova_to_unix, nova_to_string, unix_to_string,"
.B "    tm_to_nova, nova_to_tm, fields_to_nova, nova_to_fields,"
.B "    current_nova_time, NOVA_EPOCH, NOVA_TIME_FACTOR, UnixTime,"
.B "    DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS, GpsTime, GPS_EPOCH, NOVA_GPS_OFFSET,"
.B "    SECONDS_PER_WEEK, nova_to_gps, gps_to_nova, unix_to_gps,"
.B "    gps_to_unix, gps_from_week_tow, gps_to_string,"
.B )
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nova_time_decoder
is a self-contained, pure-Python (standard-library-only) reimplementation of
the
.B novadaq::timeutils
C++ library from the NOvA DAQ
.B NovaTimingUtilities
package. A NOvA timestamp is an unsigned 64-bit count of 64 MHz clock ticks
since the NOvA epoch (01-Jan-2010 00:00:00 UTC). NOvA time contains no leap
seconds; UNIX time does, so post-epoch leap seconds are added or removed during
conversion.
.SH CONSTANTS
.TP
.B NOVA_EPOCH
UNIX
.I time_t
of the NOvA epoch (1262304000).
.TP
.B NOVA_TIME_FACTOR
NOvA clock ticks per second (64000000).
.TP
.B DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS
Tuple of UNIX
.I time_t
thresholds for the leap seconds inserted after the epoch (2012, 2015, 2016).
Every UTC-facing conversion function accepts a
.I leap_seconds
keyword argument to override this table.
.TP
.B GPS_EPOCH
UNIX
.I time_t
of the GPS epoch, 06-Jan-1980 00:00:00 UTC (315964800).
.TP
.B NOVA_GPS_OFFSET
GPS time, in whole seconds since the GPS epoch, of the NOvA epoch (946339215).
Because both NOvA and GPS time are continuous (leap-second-free) timescales,
this fixed offset fully defines the NOvA/GPS conversion.
.TP
.B SECONDS_PER_WEEK
Seconds in a GPS week (604800).
.SH TYPES
.TP
.B UnixTime(sec, nsec=0)
A
.BR typing.NamedTuple " with fields " sec " (UNIX seconds) and " nsec
(nanosecond remainder). The read-only property
.B usec
returns
.IR "nsec // 1000" .
.TP
.B GpsTime(seconds, nsec=0)
A
.BR typing.NamedTuple " with fields " seconds
(whole GPS seconds since the GPS epoch, continuous/no leap seconds) and
.B nsec
(nanosecond remainder). Read-only properties
.B week
(full GPS week number, not reduced modulo 1024) and
.B tow
(whole-second time-of-week, 0..604799) are provided.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.BI "unix_to_nova(sec, nsec=0, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> Optional[int]"
Convert a UNIX time to a NOvA tick count. Returns
.B None
if the input predates the NOvA epoch.
.TP
.BI "nova_to_unix(nova_time, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> UnixTime"
Convert a NOvA tick count to a
.BR UnixTime .
.TP
.BI "tm_to_nova(tm, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> Optional[int]"
Convert a UTC
.B time.struct_time
to a NOvA tick count.
.TP
.BI "nova_to_tm(nova_time, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> time.struct_time"
Convert a NOvA tick count to a UTC
.BR time.struct_time .
.TP
.BI "fields_to_nova(sec, minute, hour, mday, mon, year, leap_seconds=...) -> Optional[int]"
Convert broken-down UTC calendar fields (C
.B struct tm
conventions:
.I mon
is 0-11,
.I year
is years since 1900) to a NOvA tick count.
.TP
.BI "nova_to_fields(nova_time, leap_seconds=...) -> tuple"
Inverse of
.BR fields_to_nova ;
returns
.IR "(sec, minute, hour, mday, mon, year)" .
.TP
.BI "current_nova_time(leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> int"
Return the current wall-clock time as a NOvA tick count.
.TP
.BI "nova_to_string(nova_time, leap_seconds=...) -> str"
Format a NOvA tick count as
.RB \(dq "YYYY-Mon-DD HH:MM:SS.pppppppppppp UTC" \(dq
(picosecond precision).
.TP
.BI "unix_to_string(sec, nsec=0) -> str"
Format a UNIX time as
.RB \(dq "YYYY-Mon-DD HH:MM:SS.nnnnnnnnn UTC" \(dq
(nanosecond precision).
.SS GPS timebase
GPS and NOvA time are both continuous; the NOvA <-> GPS conversions are an
exact fixed offset and take no leap-second argument. The GPS <-> UNIX
conversions do use the leap-second table. All are defined for instants at or
after the NOvA epoch and return
.B None
otherwise.
.TP
.BI "nova_to_gps(nova_time) -> GpsTime"
Convert a NOvA base time to a
.BR GpsTime .
.TP
.BI "gps_to_nova(seconds, nsec=0) -> Optional[int]"
Convert a GPS time to a NOvA base time.
.TP
.BI "unix_to_gps(sec, nsec=0, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> Optional[GpsTime]"
Convert a UNIX time to a
.BR GpsTime .
.TP
.BI "gps_to_unix(seconds, nsec=0, leap_seconds=DEFAULT_LEAP_SECONDS) -> Optional[UnixTime]"
Convert a GPS time to a
.BR UnixTime .
.TP
.BI "gps_from_week_tow(week, tow, nsec=0) -> GpsTime"
Build a
.B GpsTime
from a full GPS week number and a time-of-week in seconds.
.TP
.BI "gps_to_string(gps) -> str"
Format a
.B GpsTime
as
.RB \(dq "week W, TOW ssssss.nnnnnnnnn (GGGG.nnn s)" \(dq.
.SH PRECISION
The original C++ used floating-point division in a few places that lose
precision for modern (large) timestamps exceeding 2**53. This library performs
the equivalent operations in exact integer arithmetic: it is bit-for-bit
compatible on every value the C++ represented exactly and strictly more
accurate elsewhere.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
.B >>> from nova_time_decoder import unix_to_nova, nova_to_string
.B >>> nova = unix_to_nova(1279807260, 5000000)
.B >>> nova
.B 1120208640320000
.B >>> nova_to_string(nova)
.B '2010-Jul-22 14:01:00.005000000000 UTC'
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nova-time-convert (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew Norman. Reimplementation of the NOvA DAQ NovaTimingUtilities package.
