.TH NOVA-TIME-CONVERT 1 "July 2026" "nova_time_decoder 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nova-time-convert \- encode and decode NOvA DAQ timestamps
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nova-time-convert
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ TIME ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nova-time-convert
converts between three representations of an instant in time and prints all of
them:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B NOvA base time
\(em an unsigned 64-bit count of 64 MHz clock ticks since the NOvA epoch
(01-Jan-2010 00:00:00 UTC);
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B UNIX time
\(em seconds and nanoseconds since 01-Jan-1970 UTC;
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B GPS time
\(em the continuous (no-leap-second) count of seconds since the GPS epoch
(06-Jan-1980 00:00:00 UTC), reported both as total GPS seconds and as GPS
week number plus time-of-week;
.IP \(bu 3
a
.B civil calendar date
in UTC.
.RE
.PP
It is a self-contained, pure-Python reimplementation of the
.B NovaTimeConvert
tool from the NOvA DAQ
.B NovaTimingUtilities
package. NOvA time does not include leap seconds, whereas UNIX time does; the
conversion adds or removes the leap seconds inserted after the NOvA epoch.
GPS time, like NOvA time, is a continuous timescale, so the NOvA/GPS
relationship is a fixed offset and needs no leap seconds; the GPS/UTC
conversion does use the leap-second table.
.SH INPUT DETECTION
When no mode flag is given, the representation of
.I TIME
is auto-detected:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
If it contains a colon it is a
.B datetime string
of the form
.RB \(dq yyyy-mmm-dd\ HH:MM:SS.frac\ [UTC] \(dq
(fraction down to one picosecond). Without a
.B UTC
suffix (or the
.B \-\-utc
flag) it is interpreted as local time.
.IP \(bu 3
Otherwise, if it contains a dot it is a
.B UNIX time
of the form
.IR sec.frac
(fraction down to one nanosecond).
.IP \(bu 3
Otherwise it is a
.B NOvA base time
integer, in decimal or
.RB \(dq 0x \(dq
hexadecimal.
.RE
.PP
GPS input is never auto-detected (GPS seconds are numerically
indistinguishable from UNIX seconds); it must be requested with
.BR \-\-gps ,
as either
.I seconds[.frac]
or
.IR week:tow[.frac] .
Every conversion, whatever the input, reports the equivalent GPS time.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-nova
Force interpretation of
.I TIME
as a NOvA base time.
.TP
.B \-\-unix
Force interpretation of
.I TIME
as a UNIX
.I sec.frac
time.
.TP
.B \-\-datetime
Force interpretation of
.I TIME
as a civil datetime string.
.TP
.B \-\-gps
Interpret
.I TIME
as a GPS time, given either as
.I seconds[.frac]
(GPS seconds since the GPS epoch) or as
.I week:tow[.frac]
(GPS week number and time-of-week in seconds).
.TP
.B \-\-utc
Interpret a datetime string as UTC, overriding suffix detection.
.TP
.B \-\-local
Interpret a datetime string as local time.
.TP
.B \-\-now
Use the current wall-clock time as the input (printed as a NOvA base time).
.TP
.BI \-\-leap\-seconds " T1,T2,..."
Override the leap-second table with a comma-separated list of UNIX
.I time_t
thresholds (the last second before each inserted leap second). Overrides the
.B NOVA_LEAP_SECONDS
environment variable.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the program version and exit.
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NOVA_LEAP_SECONDS
Default leap-second table, in the same format as
.BR \-\-leap\-seconds .
A command-line option, if present, takes precedence.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful conversion.
.TP
.B 2
No input was supplied (usage printed) or an argument could not be parsed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Decode a NOvA base time (decimal or hexadecimal):
.PP
.RS
.EX
nova-time-convert 1120208640000000
nova-time-convert 0x43d950a5b0000
.EE
.RE
.PP
Encode a UNIX time:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nova-time-convert 1279807260.005
.EE
.RE
.PP
Encode a civil datetime in UTC:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nova-time-convert "2010-Jul-22 14:22:30.000000015625 UTC"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Decode a GPS time (total seconds, or week and time-of-week):
.PP
.RS
.EX
nova-time-convert --gps 1025136016
nova-time-convert --gps 1695:259216
.EE
.RE
.PP
Show the current time:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nova-time-convert --now
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nova_time_decoder (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrew Norman. Reimplementation of the NOvA DAQ NovaTimingUtilities package.
